BRL-CAD is open source software controlled and maintained by the
BRL-CAD developers.  The individual BRL-CAD authors retain the
copyright to their respective contributions unless otherwise noted or
arranged.

BRL-CAD is covered by several licenses including but not limited to
the GNU General Public License (GPL), the GNU Library General Public
License (LGPL), a Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license, and
the GNU Free Documentation License.  The specific terms of BRL-CAD's
licenses should be included in the doc/legal/ directory of the source
code distribution and should be consulted for more details,
information, and implications of each license.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License and
the GNU Library General Public License along with this distribution;
if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place,
Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA.

The BRL-CAD package utilizes and redistributes copies of several 3rd
party source code, libraries, and/or applications.  Said 3rd party
source code, libraries, and/or applications all retain their
respective licenses and copyrights and should be referred to
individually for their terms.  When referring to BRL-CAD source code,
documentation, and/or libraries, this is not meant to include or imply
3rd party source code, libraries, and/or applications unless
specifically stated otherwise.  The majority of the 3rd party source
code, libraries, and applications included with BRL-CAD are located in
the src/other/ directory of the source code distribution.

BRL-CAD consists primarily of libraries, applications, documentation,
and build infrastructure.  The BRL-CAD libraries include the headers
in the include/ directory as well as all of the directories that begin
with the prefix "lib" in the src/ directory (e.g. src/librt/).  All of
BRL-CAD's libraries are covered by the terms of the LGPL.  BRL-CAD's
documentation consists of manual pages located throughout the package,
the majority of files in the doc/ directory, and the top-level
administrative files (e.g. README and AUTHORS).  All of BRL-CAD's
documentation is covered by the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
License.  All of BRL-CAD's build infrastructure, including many useful
build and test scripts located in the misc/ directory are provided
either under an unrestrictive BSD-style license or said files are in
the public domain.  The rest of the BRL-CAD package, with the
exception of the src/other directory and not including the library
directories in src/, is covered by the terms of the GPL unless
specifically denoted otherwise.

There is no warranty or other guarantee of fitness for this software,
it is provided solely "as is".  Bug reports or fixes should be sent to
the BRL-CAD developers via the SourceForge project site at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/bzflag/, which may or may not be acted
upon.

The mark "BRL-CAD" is a Registered Trademark of the United States
Army.  All rights are reserved.

