                             BRL-CAD
                         Release 6.1.0
                       http://brlcad.org/


CONTENTS

This README file exists only to provide you a brief roadmap to the
contents of the BRL-CAD distribution.  The information on how to
install and operate the software, and perform the benchmark tests have
become sufficiently large that they are now each a standalone
document.  

Please note that this distribution package does not include the
various military-specific model analysis tools such as MUVES, GIFT,
SAR, SLAVE, VAST, etc., nor does it include any military geometry
databases.  If you desire to have access to this material, please
contact one of the BRL-CAD developers.

INSTALLATION

To install BRL-CAD, see the instructions in doc/install.doc. This file
includes directions on the best way to get started with the
distribution, as well as details on how to configure and install the
software.  This file also includes directions on how to compile and
run the benchmark tests.

BENCHMARK

See the paper in doc/benchmark.doc for information on analyzing the
results of the benchmark tests.  Comparisons between various different
computers are listed.

BACKGROUND MATERIAL

For overview information on the whole package, consult the overview
paper in the filepapers/overview, and the brlcad(1) manual page in the
file util/brlcad.1.  For a discussion of the significance of this
software, read the paper "Understanding the Preparation and Analysis
of Solid Models".

DISTRIBUTION DETAILS

This software is provided under the terms of several license
agreements including the GNU General Public License (GPL), the GNU
Library General Public License (LGPL), the Berkely Software
Distribution License (BSD, revised), and the Free Documentation
License (FDL).  There are also certain portions that are in the public
domain.

This software was previously governed by a limited distribution
agreement.  The previous agreement continues to apply to the
previously released versions of the BRL-CAD package.

Full service distribution: The Survivability/Vulnerability Information
Analysis Center (SURVIAC) administers the supported BRL-CAD
distributions and information exchange programs for ARL.  Full service
distributions a copy of the full distribution materials on your choice
of magnetic tape media, or you may elect to obtain your copy via FTP.
One printed set of BRL-CAD documentation will be mailed to you.
Software upgrades will be provided at no additional charge, and you
will have access to full technical assistance by phone, FAX, letter,
or E-mail.  Agencies of the Federal Government may acquire the full
service distribution with a simple MIPR or OGA funds transfer.

For further details, contact:

BRL-CAD Distribution
SURVIAC Aberdeen Satellite Office
4695 Millennium Drive
Belcamp, MD 210017-1505  USA

or call USA telephone (410) 273-7794, send E-mail to
<cad-dist@arl.army.mil>, FAX your letter to USA (410) 272-6763, or
write to the above address.

COMMUNICATION

You are invited to participate in the InterNet (aka "ARPANET")
electronic mailing list on the BRL-CAD software, which is called
<brlcad-users@lists.sourceforge.net>.  If you are a developer, there
is also a separate list called <brlcad-devel@lists.sourceforge.net>.
Bug reports and discussions of new features are the main topics; the
volume of messages varies.

A variety of information on BRL-CAD is available via the
World-Wide-Web.  Papers, documentation, and the software repository
may be found at:

http://brlcad.org

FUTURE EVENTS

It is expected that new releases of this software will be issued
between once and twice a year.  Information about new releases will be
routinely provided by electronic mail to recipients of this software.

Best Wishes,
The BRL-CAD Development Team
